間(あいだ):while; during: It’s used to express that you do something the whole time throughout a certain period of time, because of this, it is often paired with words like ずっと, as this also expresses the concept of doing something the whole time within a set period
Between: between 2 things
	USAGE:
	Verbs in dictionary form()
	Nouns followed by の()

ここに、来るまでの間…ずっと願ってたよ。
While I was coming here… I was hoping the whole time.

九時から五時までの間	between 9-5 o’clock

散歩している間、ずっと雨が降っていた
While I was walking, it rained the whole time


間に: while/during – something happened: very similar to 間, the difference is that it’s used to express doing a momentarily action rather than a continuous one over that period of time.

さんぽ				はじめた
散歩している間に、雨が降り始めた
WHILE I was walking, it started to rain. The action of beginning only happens once, it isn’t continuous

あまり/あんまり〜ない:not very; not much:
後で:after-; later: used to express doing something after another things. It’ used with verbs in the casual past form, or with nouns followed by the の particle.

じゅぎょう
授業が終わった後で、家に帰る
After I finish class, I will go home.

			かず
その後で、のうのうと数をふやしたのがお前たちだ
After that, it was you who carefreely increased in number

ば:it must? Be used with hypotheticals.
食べる		食べれば
飲む		飲めば
行く		行けば

行かなければ		if you don’t go…
I-adjectives: turn last i into ければ, for negatives, turn last i into くなければ

Na-adjective(don’t add the na) and nouns:ならば　であれば
Negative: じゃなければ	ではなければ

便利ならば	if it’s convenient
便利じゃなければ	if it’s not convenient
ピザならば	if it’s pizza

場合は:In the event of; In the case that:this piece of language can follow casual form verbs, nouns with the の particle and or adjective to speak about something and put highlight on that particular case or event. It’s used to express general facts, statements, opinions or advice about a topic

かじのばあいは
火事の場合は		in the event of a fire

じしんのばあいは
地震の場合は		in the event of an earthquake

おんなのばあいはもっとめんどうだ
女の場合はもっと面倒だ	in the case of women, it’s even more trouble

ばかり/ばっかり:only; nothing but–: it’s used to express being nothing but, or doing only one thing, it follows verbs in the て form or nouns.

うそばかり
噓ばかり		nothing but lies

泣いてばかりだ	Doing nothing but cry

だけで: just by; just by doing; with only:this piece of grammar is used to show something being done just by another verb or noun, verb in casual form(見る) or a noun by itself

見るだけで	only by looking

お金だけで	only with money

だいく		となりまち
ここのうちのお父さんは大工さんなんです
今は隣町で大きな仕事をしているらしくて
The father of this house is a carpenter
Apparently he is doing a big job in the neighboring town right now.
出す: to begin to; to start to; to burst into; …out(e.g. Jump out, carry out): this is used after a verb stem form to express an action or event that suddenly happens, it emphasizes an outward action.

笑い出す	わらいだす	to start laughing(to burst out laughing)
飛び出す	とびだす	to jump out

その日人類は思い出した	じんるい
That day, humanity remembered

敵が動き出しました		てき	うごく
The enemy has begun moving

でございます: to be(honorific です): this is a further polite level of です and it’s mostly used in formal situation, workstaff speaking very respectfully to their customers.

お忘れでございますか
Have you forgotten(me)?

もうちょう
盲腸の娘をお助けいただいた女でございます
I am the woman who received your help with my daughter who had appendicitis

でも: … or something; how about –: this other use of でも is used to suggest something non-specific

ゲームでもしましょう	let’s play games or something
How about let’s play games

パーティーでもやるのか	are you doing a party or something

ではないか/じゃないか:right?; isn’t it?

が必要: need; necessary: it’s used to express when something is needed or neccesary
は=’as for’			you are needed
が=’the one the that is’	you are the one that is needed

サムお願い　あなたが必要なの
Sam, please, I need you(you are what is needed)


がする: to smell; to hear, to taste: it’s used after a noun to express the sensation that is attached with that particular noun.
変な味がする		へんなあじ
It has a weird taste
いい匂いがする	いいにおいがする
To smell something nice

声がする	to hear a voice

不思議な感じがした	ふしぎなかんじ
I felt a mysterious feeling

ワシもそこに行かなければならなかったような気がするぞい
I have a feeling that I also must go there


がる・がっている: to show signs of;	to appear; to feel; to think: it turns adjectives into verbs.

怖い, if you want to say someone is being frightened or scared, you are now talking  about their  appearance, or being a certain way, here you would say 怖がる

強がっている		being strong(show signs of being strong)

何をどんなに怖がっているんだ
What are you being so afraid of?

べつに
別に怖がってなんかいないわ
I’m not being afraid or anything.


がり: someone tends to; has a tendency to; has a sensitivity to: it turns an adjective into a noun that is used to express someone’s tendency to be a certain way. Almost exclusively used to talk about people’s personality or their sensitivity towards certain things.

怖い	scary(adjective)
怖がり	have a tendency to be scared(noun)




ございます: to be; to exist(the polite form of ある):

始める: to start to; to begin to: it’s used after the stem form of a verb to mean to start to, or begin to do something. While 出す has a feeling that the verb suddenly occurs, 始める is more about your intentional action to begin doing something

子供が飛び出した	the child (suddenly) jumped out: a feeling of suddenly occurring
子供が飛び始めた	the child begin to jump: it feels like a controlled intentional action



はずだ: it must be; it should be: it’s used to express expectation that something should be a certain way. It’s put after verbs in the dictionary form, and after nouns+の.

I-adjective(full form): いい plus はずだ
Na-adjective: な+はずだ




はずがない: it cannot be(impossible): the negative form of はずだ, it means that something is expected to not be the case, or that it cannot be.

ばかな！こんなことがあるはずがない
Impossible! There is no way this kind of thing could happen



必要がある: need to; it is necessary to: it’s mostly used with verbs in the dictionary form.

行く必要がある	it is necessary to go

勉強する必要がある	it is necessary to study

こたえる
今すぐに答える必要はありません、どうかじっくり考えてください
You don’t have to answer right away, please take your time.

意向形(いこうけい):volitional form; let’s:
いらっしゃる: to be; to come; to go(polite form of いる):it’s a 尊敬語(そんけいご), the honorific language that you use to speak of another’s actions

どこからいらっしゃったんです
Where are you from?


いたします(to do, polite form of する):another piece of 敬語(honorific speech), but this time it’s under the category 謙譲語(けんじょうご)(humble speech). In some 敬語(けいご) you put the great honor and position on the listener’s actions, and put them above you. In 謙譲語 you do the opposite, you depreciate yourself to praise the listener, you put yourself down to put others up.

危険ですので　こちらお預かりいたします
きけんですので　こちらおあずかりいたします
As it is dangerous, I will be taking care of this.

じゃないか　じゃねえか:right?, isn’t it?; confirmation.
あのヤロウ

地協って言ったな…まあまあの星じゃないか
ちきょうっていったな…まあまあのほしじゃないか
He said it was called earth yeah… not a bad planet is it?

かどうか:whether or not:

正しいかどうかわからない		ただしい
I don’t know whether or not it’s correct

可笑しいかどうか決めんのは、お前じゃねえ
The one who decides whether or not it’s strange isn’t you.

君の僕に対する感情は本物かどうか重要なのにかい	
たいする　かんじょう　ほんもの　じゅうよう
Regarding your feelings for me, is it important whether or not I’m the real deal?


かしら: I wonder(feminine): It’s a feminine expression mainly used as a way of asking a question or to show that you’re thinking about something. The same usage as かな

死んだら、生まれ変われるしから	うまれかわれる
If I die, I wonder will I be reborn?

これじゃ、足跡を取るのも難しいんじゃないかしら…　あしあと　とる　むずかしい
In that case, I wonder if it will also be difficult to take footprints…


かい: turns a sentence into a yes/no question: replaces か, it is how you asked a closed question in japanese. It’s casual. It’s used with children or with people of equal or lower status. It feels a little direct to ask a yes or no question, so it’s a casual piece of language


かもしらない	かもしれん	かもしれません	かも: might; perhaps; indicates possibility: It’s used with verbs, adjectives and nouns to indicate a possibility of something

高いかもしれない	It might be expensive

面白いかもしれない	It might be interesting/funny

いや、もしかしたら遠い未来のことかもしれない
No, perhaps maybe sometime in the distant future

おれの物語の最終消費者なのかも...	さいしゅうしょう
This may be the last chapter in my story…


かな: I wonder: the gender neutral way of expressing ‘I wonder’

で／から　作る: made from; made with: It’s used to show what something is made from or made with.

この机は木で作られています
This table is made with wood

きっと: surely; undoubtedly; almost certainly; most likely: It’s used to add a high degree of certainty to what you’re saying

明日は、きっと雨でしょう
As for tomorrow, It will certainly rain I think

きっとこんな時は酒の力が物を言うのだ
It’s undoubtedly times like this that the power of alcohol really speaks words.

いつか、きっと、そのことに気づくときが来るわ
Someday, for sure, the time will come when that is realized


頃　ころ・ごろ: around; about; when: the usage between ころ・ごろ differ so make sure to pay attention. ごろ is used with a noun of time(5 am, now), it means around or about that time.ころ refers to the time when something happens, it can be used with verbs(dictionary form), adjectives(+の), and nouns(+の)

今ごろは城の兵があなた達を探しまわっているはずです
	しろ		さがしまわる
Around now, the castle’s guards should be searching around for you guys.


こと:verb nominalizer:it turns a verb into a noun, it can mean ‘the thing of doing that verb’.

食べる		食べること
Eat		eating

考えることがたくさなります		かんがえる
I have lots I’m thinking about

ことがある: to have things to do; there are times when –; sometimes do–: 
STRICT RULE: It must be used with a non-past verb, since it turns it into a different grammar point

お前にはまだすることがある
There are still things you need to do

たまにピザを食べることがある
There are times when I eat pizza



ことができる: can; be able to: It’s basically a verb in the potential form, but it’s simpler to use, it can combine with previous grammar points, where you nominalize a verb by turning it into こと and now you can talk about being able to do that verb

いつでもたやすく我らの、占領下に置く事ができるだろう
At any time, I could easily place you under my military occupation




ことになる　こととなる(it’s more formal and strict): It has been decided that…; It turns out that…: It’s used when irrespective of the speaker’s volition, an arrangement or decision has been made by some other unspecified person or party that something will become a certain way, it’s similar to the passive form in this regard.

まさか…君のお母さんを殺してしまうことになるとは…
No way… for it to turn out to kill your mother…

ことにする: to decide on: It’s used to show your direct volition or will in making something happen,

出かける事にした
You decide to go out

			しょうこ
もう十分だな、そろそろ証拠を消す事にしよう
That’s enough I guess, I’m going to decide to get rid of the evidence now.

くする(i-adjective)／にする(na-adjective): to make something – : It’s used. It expresses to make something in the way of that adjective

怖くする	to make something scary

自分と…自分が大切にしている誰か?何か?そのために戦う
Ourselves and… those who we make important to us? What we make important? We fight for that reason.

急に　きゅうに: quickly; immediately; hastily; suddenly; abruptly; unexpectedly: It’s used when you want to express doing something suddenly


いててて…ボク！急に止まるな
Owww… boku! Don’t stop suddenly like that

までに: by; by the time; indicates time limit: It’s used to give a time limit to something, to set deadlines or times by which you want something to be done. It’s often seen following nouns of time/date, it can also follow verbs in the dictionary form

日が暮れるまでにガーデンに戻ること	くれる
You are to return to the garden by the time the sun sets.
三十歳になるまでに結婚したいです
I want to get married by the time I’m 30.
まま: as it is; current state; without changing: It’s used when something is being left in the current state without changing. It follows noun+の, ful form adjective+の. You can only use まま with the past or negative form of verbs.

しないまま
Left in the state of not being done

このままじゃダメ
I cannot keep going on like this

電気をつけたまま寝る
I sleep with the light turned on.
Alt exp(while/with): it’s used to describe the state that hasn’t changed.This one is used when the state of something hasn’t changed after(since) the action. THE STATE HASN’T CHANGED

テレビをつけたまま寝る	I sleep with the tv on
テレビをつけたまま寝た	I fell asleep with the tv on

-we use it when we do something unusual or different from other people

または: both; or; otherwise; choice between A or B: It can be used between 2 options. But also 

ハニーガールまたはハニーボーイのご氏名はありますか	しめい
Do you have any request for any honey girls or honey boys?

電話またはメールで返事してください	へんじ
Please reply by either phone or email

みたいだ: like; similar to; resembling: It’s used to express something seeming to be the case. It’s used after a reasoning or judgment after some piece of information, it’s the spoken version of 　ようだ. It can be used with adjectives, nouns, and verbs.

次は藤崎の自己紹介みたいだ		ふじさき　じこしょうかい
It seems like it’s Fujisaki's self introduction next.

夏みたいだ	It’s like summer

彼女は少し疲れてるみたいだ　つかれてる
She seems a bit tired



みたいな: It’s used to modify a noun(or verb) to be like or similar to another noun or verb.

あなたみたいな人は凄いと思うよ　　　すごい
I think a person like you is amazing

彼が持っているみたいなパソコンが欲しい
I want a computer like the one he has

みたいに: like; similar to(used with verbs/adjectives): It’s used on verbs or nouns to modify other verbs or adjectives. It’s used when you’re expressing you’re doing something X, or you’re appearing like X. basically an ADVERB

子供みたいに遊んでいる
Playing like children

あなたみたいに美しい人は初めてだ		うつくしい	はじめて
This is the first time for me(seeing) a person so beautiful like you.

あたしは猫みたいに静かなんだ
I’m quiet like a cat

も: as many as; as much as; up to; nearly: It’s always precede by a counter of number or times.

何百年も戦い続けてきたのよ
We have continued to fight for up to several hundred years.

な: don’t: it’s put at the end of a verb in the dictionary form to order someone to not do that action, very strong, use よ soften it.

など: such as; things like:
ながら: while; during; as; simultaneously: It’s a conjunction which indicates that the action expressed by the preceding verb takes place at the same time as the following statement after. The verb connected to ながら is the secondary action. The verb must be in the stem form

			かけて	　あおぞら　わらい	ひびかせ
それでも、風のように駆けていた青空に、笑い声を響かせながら
Even so, we ran like the wind, while making our laughing voices echo into the blue sky.
(the sentence order moves around for artistic effect)

飲みながら話しましょう　Let’s talk while we drink



なかなか: very; considerably; easily; readily; fairly; quite; highly; rather:

なかなか綺麗な花じゃねえか
It’s quite a pretty flower isn’t it?

なかなか〜ない: not easy to; struggling to; not able to: It’s used with verb on the negative form to show the verb is not easily done, or that the speaker is struggling to do that verb.

なかなか寝れない
I’m struggling to sleep


なければいけない: must do something; have to do something: It’s a way of expressing obligation that you need to do something, it’s something that has a sense of obligation that comes from within yourself. Similar to なくてはいけない. It’s usually used as なきゃ




なければならない: must to do something; have to do something: It’s used to express an obligation to do something that feels more like a rule that is determined by others. Also used as なきゃならない



なら: If; in that case:It can only be used in situations where the outcome is uncertain. It can be used with verbs, adjectives, and nouns

WRONG:秋になるなら　because autumn will arrive.

暑いなら	If you’re hot

欲しいなら	If you want


僕たちならきっと勝てる
If it’s us, we will win for sure


なさい:do this: soft but firm way of issuing a command. Stem form, then なさい


なさる:to do(honorific, used for other’s actions): 孫家後(そんけいご) version of する. 

はい、どうなさいましたか
Yes, has something happened?

に気がつく: to notice; to realize: It must be used with nouns or nominalized verbs.we can combine the がつ to make づ, so it’s きづいた, which is more common

鞄を忘れたことに気がついた		かばん
I realized that I had forgotten my bag

間違いに気がついた		まちがい
I realized my mistake

気がついた
You came to your senses

・・・we can combine the がつ to make づ, so it’s きづいた, which is more common


にみえる: to look; to seem; to appear: It’s used when something visually appears to be a certain way, it’s able to be seen in a certain way.


にくい: difficult to do: It’s used when a verb is actually difficult to do in its process. Put the verb in the stem form, and add にくい.

見る	見にくい	difficult to see
食べる		食べにくい	difficult to eat


の中で: in; among: It’s used to express being among or in a noun. Follow the noun with の中で. 

心の中で	In my heart

この中で、どっちが欲しい
Among these, which do you want?

彼をコロンビアの胸の中で、生まれ変わらせたまえ
May he be reborn  in the bosom of Colombia

のに: 1.although; in spite of; even though: it can be used with verbs in the causal form or following nouns as なのに

約束したのに		やくそく
Even though you promised

日曜日なのに
Despite it being a sunday

安いのに、買わない	Even though it’s cheap, I won’t buy it
面白いのに、見ない	Even though it’s funny, I won’t watch it

2. To(do something); in order to: It’s used to express something being in order to do another thing. It’s used with verbs in the DICTIONARY FORM  ONLY.

ておしぐるま　たんぼ	おこめ　はこぶ
手押し車だよ！田んぼからお米を運ぶのに使うの
It’s a wheelbarrow! You use it in order to carry rice from the rice fields.

家に帰るのに三時間かかりました
In order to return home, it took 3 hours


のは〜だ: A is B; the reason for A is B: This is an emphatic construction, It’s used when you want to make a strong statement about the content of the latter part of the sentence.

Reality +のは+ explanation/reason/(thing you want to emphasize)+です

私が住んでいるのは京都です。東京じゃありません
The place where I live in kyoto. It’s not tokyo

お〜ください:please do(honorific):

お〜になる: to do(honorific): 

きゃくさま
お客様がお見えになりました
The customer has become able to see	The customer has arrived

父王が…ただ今…お亡くなりになりました
Your royal father… has just now… passed away
おきに: repeated at intervals, ever – : specific. You use it with a measurable noun like time, days, or meters. It expresses something being done at every one of those intervals

一週間おきに	every 1 week

だいたい	ふうせん	あらわれます
大体五分おきに風船が現れます
Around every 5 minutes a balloon appears

一時間おきに電車が来ます
Every hour a train comes

おる: humble いる: The humble way to use いる, it’s 謙譲語(けんじょうご), humble speech. It’s used the same way we use いる, continuous form, etc.

終わる: to finish; to end : follows a verb in the stem form to show you finish doing that verb.

話し終わった	finished talking

食べ終わった	finished eating

着替え終わったか、じたん?		きがえ
Have you finished changing clothes Zidane?

られる: potential form; ability or inability to do something: It’s used to express the ability or inability to do a certain action.

らしい: It seems like; I heard; apparently: It’s used with verbs, nouns or adjectives to express that something seems a certain way. It’s used when you hear or when you get some sort of information about that thing.

雨らしい	It seems like rain

君らしい	It’s very like you(things you did/said)

寝すぎるのは体に悪いらしいです
Apparently it’s bad for your body to sleep too much

学生らしくもっと勉強しなさい
Study more like a student

さ: -ness; nominalizer for adjectives: It turns an adjective into a noun

美しい		美しさ		beautiful/beauty

長い		長さ		long(adjective)	/length(noun)

さっき: some time ago; just now: It’s used to show something happened just now. Generally it’s used to show that the event that is being mentioned happened very recently

さっき言ったとおり
As I said just now

さっき起きたばかり
I just now woke up


させる: causative form; to make/let somebody do something: It means one of two things; you’re either making someone do the verb that is connected to させる, or you are letting someone do the verb.

待たせたな
Kept you waiting huh(made you wait)

風を吹かせます
I will make the wind blow

ここから先へ行かせません		さき
I will not allow to go further than here

させられる: causative-passive; to be made to do something :

させてください: please let me do: 

では早速ですがいろいろ聞かせてください		さっそく
This may be sudden but, please allow to ask you some questions

さすが: as one would expect; as is to be expected; even: it’s an adverb that you can use to show that somethings is just as you expected it to be, It indicates the speaker is impressed or surprised by whatever it is that they are referring to.

さすがに強いじゃねーか、なあ?風影	かぜかげ
You’re pretty strong as expected huh? Kazekage

し: and; and what’s more; emphasis: It’s used after verbs, i-adjectives, and na-adjectives/nouns preceded by a だ().

雨が降っているし
料理は上手いし		うまい
スポーツも上手だし		じょうず

友達と遊びたいし、宿題はしなくていけないし、どうしよう
I want to play with my friends, and what’s more I gotta study, what do I do

彼は気分がいいときもあるし、悪いときもある
There are times when he is in a good mood, and also times where he is in a bad mood

そんなこと言ったないし
I didn’t say such a thing

しか〜ない: only, nothing but

ピザしか食べない	I eat nothing but pizza

時間は少ししかない		I only have a little bit of time

親波は親波しかいない！だから今助ける	たすける
Oyanami has no one but herself! That’s why now, I will save her

そんなに: so much; so ; like that: 

それでも: but still; and yet; even so; nevertheless: It admits the first thing, and then continues with the second. It’s often used with contradicitons

テストの準備をしていなかった、それでも、合格した	じゅんび	ごうかく
I didn’t prepare for the test, even so, I passed

それに:besides; in addition; also; moreover: another CONJUNCTION that is put in the middle of one statement and another.

これはとっても美味しい、それに値段もいい	おいしい	ねだん
This is very delicious, moreover, the price is also good

おにぎり、それにお茶お願いします
I’d like an onigiri, and also, a green tea please.


そうだ: I heard that; it is said that: It relays some information
Na-adjectives: remove な, add だ+そうだ

彼は仕事を辞めるそうだ	やめる
I heard that he was quitting his job


そうだ: looks like; appears like; seeming: It’s used to express that something looks a certain way, it seems a certain way, or appears a certain way. It describes how something looks.

Verb: stem form +そうだ
I-adjective: remove i +そうだ
Negatives: negative form, replace い with さ

独身そうだ	They look/seem single

雨が降らなさそうだ		It seems like it’s not raining

面白そうじゃねえか！
That seems interesting doesn’t it?!

別に用は、なさそうだ
It doesn’t appear like you have a particular use for this

そうに(verbs)・そうな(noun): seems like; looks like: It’s used to modify a verb or noun to appear a certain way. If the second part of the sentence is a verb or verb statement you use そうに, if it’s a noun you use そうな

Stem form verbs + そうに/そうな
Na-adjective without the na + そうに/そうな
I-adjective without last i + そうに/そうな

つかれる
疲れそうに歩いている	He is walking seeming tired

面白そうな映画	an interesting seeming movie



たばかり・たばっかり: just  finished; something just occurred: It’s used to expressed when you have just finished a verb, or a verb has just occurred, regardless of how much time has actually passed, rather it’s more focused on how the speaker feels. Put the verb into the casual past tense and add ばかり

食べたばかり		I just finished eating
始まったばっかり	It has just begun

ことしはいった
ほら、今年入ったばっかりの女の先生
Come on, the teacher who just entered the school this year!

たところ: just finished doing; was just doing: It’s used when the action is very recent, unlike たばかり, this has be used for an event that feels like it’s very recent and perhaps even present or ongoing. This expression cannot modify a noun that follows.

食べ物を買いに行ったところです
I was just going to buy some food./I have just left to go buy some food.

他動詞(たどうし)・自動詞(じどうし): Transitive(verb is done by an actor, the focus is on the doer) and intransitive(verb occurs without a clear actor, the focus is on the action)  verbs: 
私はそれを始めます			それが始まった
I will begin that(transitive)		That began(intransitive)

私は窓を開けた			窓が開けている
I opened the window(Transitive)	The window is opened(Intransitive)
######SUPER IMPORTANT
Transitive: use を to show what you’re doing the verb to
Intransitive: use が

たがる: wants to do(third person): related to がる, which turns adjectives into verbs. It turns verbs into appearing to be doing verbs. たがる is used describe what someone else appears to want to do.

怖い				こわがっている
scary(adjective)	->	being scared(verb)

食べたい		->	食べたがっている
Want to eat		->	appearing to want to eat

なんでも食いたがるなTIIPOは	
You want to eat anything, don’t you, Teepo?
たら: If; after; when: It can be used for hypotheticals. It’s used in a wider range

旅やめたらなにしようかな
If/when I quit my journey; I wonder what I’d do…

たらどう: why don’t you(used to give advice): It’s used to express giving someone advice. It can only be used with verbs to suggest or give advice for someone to do that verb.

ＤＲナオミに聞いてみたらこうだ
How about trying to ask Dr. Naomi

たら・ば　いいですか: What should I do?; speaker seeking instructions from the listener: ば is used in some situations, たら can be used in any situation

俺たちは…どうしたらいい?この痛みはどうしたらいい?
What… should we do? What should we do with this pain?

何を食べたらいいですか
What should I eat?		What is good if I eat it?	

て／で: Conjunctive particle; so; because of A, B…: It’s used as a conjunctive particle used to connect parts of a sentence together. To use this you put the verb, noun, or adjective into its te conjugation.

あの教室のドアは古くて、開きにくいです		あく
That classroom door is old and is difficult to open

で。その場合、君は私のマスターなのか
So, In that case, are you my master?

てあげる: to do for; to do a favor: It’s used express doing something for someone, like doing someone a favor by doing the verb attached to あげる. Generally speaking the recipient of the action is marked by the に particle. It means to do the verb for someone but not for yourself.

この剣を貸してあげます	けん	かして
I will lend you this sword(for you)

買ってあげる	I will buy it(for you)

作ってあげる	I will make it(for you)

彼女は彼に日本語を教えてあげました
She taught him japanese(for him).


てほしい: I want you to; I need you to: It’s used to express you want someone to do something

教えてほしい		I want you to teach me

忘れないでほしい	I want you to not forget

本当はあなたに行ってほしかった
The truth is I wanted you to go.

ていく: to start; to continue; to go on: 

これからどんどん暑くなっていく
From here on it’s going to go on to become hotter and hotter

ていた: was doing something(past continuous):


ていただけませんか: Could you please: It’s a common way to politely ask someone if they can do something.

写真を撮っていただけませんか
Could you please take a photo for me?	
Would I not be able to receive you taking this photo for me

てくれる: To do a favor; to do something for someone: If you want to speak in a more neutral way, and ask someone to do something for you.

てあげる	-doing a favor(you -> others)
てくれる	-have favor done(others-> you)
てもらう	-to receive something(from anyone to anyone)

てくる: to do; to become; to continue; to start: to come and do something.

お腹が空いてきた	おなかがすいて
I’m hungry(I have come to be hungry)

見えてきた	I have come to be able to see(something)

力のかけらを見つけた！なんだか力がわいてきた!
You found a fragment of power! You feel a power come to well up inside you!

てみる: try doing: Used to express trying to do something

食べてみる	To try to eat
行ってみる	To try to go

試してみたいのです		ためす
I want to try to test her

よし、書き出してみるか
Alright, I guess I’ll try to write it out


てもらう: To get somebody to do something	: You are receiving someone do something for you, who you receive from is indicated with the に particle.

てあげる	-doing a favor(you -> others)
てくれる	-have favor done(others-> you)
てもらう	-to receive something(from anyone to anyone)

あなたに日本語を教えてもらいたい
I want to receive you teaching me japanese.(I want you to teach me japanese)


ておく(とく): To do something in advance: 

勉強しとく	To study in advance

だが、これだけは言っておく
However, I’ll just say this in advance

てしまう／ちゃう・じゃう: To do something by accident; to finish completely: It’s often used to express regret, or to do an unfavorable or regrettable action.

寝ちゃった	I completely/accidentally fell sleep

しまった	Crap!(did something regretable)


てすみません: I’m sorry for: It’s used to show you are sorry for doing a certain action

ぎりあん、あたしお役に立てなくてすみません
Gillian, I’m sorry for not being of help
てやる(casual てあげる): to do for; to do a favor(casual): also give or do to an inferior.

仕方がない、私はサポートしてやろう
It can’t be help, I’ll give you support

殺してやる	I will kill you


(3:17)てよかった: I’m glad that… : It’s used to express that you’re glad that some action was done

会えてよかった
I’m glad that I was able to meet you


ているところ: In the process of doing: It’s used to express doing an action right at this present moment, or something that you’re doing right now in general.

勉強しているところ　Right now I’m(in the process of) studying

その剣使ってるところ見たことないぞ	けん	つかう
I’ve never seen you using that sword.
I’ve never seen you(in the process of) using that sword.

ても・でも: even; even if; even though: You need a verb, adjective or noun on its て form

安くても買わない
Even if it’s cheap, I won’t buy it

食べてもお腹が空きます	おなか　すきます
Even if I eat, I’m hungry

子供でも出来る事よ
Even if it’s a child, it’s a thing you can do.

フフン、けど女でも男でも強い者は美しいのよね	もの
Huhun, however, whether you are a woman or a man, those who are strong are beautiful.




と:whenever A happens, B also happens: it’s used between 2 statements to show an incredibly strong connection between the 2. It’s so strong that whenever A is the case, B will occur

毎日ピザを食べると太ります		ふとります
If you eat pizza everyday, you will get fat

と言ってもいい:you could say; one might say; I’d say: this expression is used to express that someone might say something something, ‘you could say something’, ‘I might say something’. The literal translation is ‘even if you said that it would be okay’ using the ても form. It’s a set phrase so you cannot change it around.

ゆがんだ	よくぼう	ぐげんか
歪んだ欲望が具現化した世界、と言ってもいい
One might call it a world in which twisted desires have materialized


という・っていう:called; named: it’s a piece of grammar with a wide range of different uses with meaning in each context. In the N4 level, the focus is on the most fundamental function, which is to show what something is called, what someone said or what something is named.

日本という国
The country called japan.

マットという人	ひと
The person called matt

ここはケージっていう場所なの	ばしょ
Is this the place called ‘the cage’?

と言われている・って言われている:it is said that: If you wanna way that something is said in a kind of passive way.

きんべん
日本人は勤勉だと言われています
It is said that Japanese people are hard-working.

今年のオリンピックが就職されると言われています
It is said that this year’s olympics will be cancelled




と聞いた・とは聞いた:I heard: To quote something you have heard

このゲームが面白いと聞いた
I have heard that this game is interesting


と思う: I think; to think: It’s used to express exactly what you think.

日本に留学


とか〜とか:among other things; such as; like: Used to list multiple examples, though it can used only once with one example, implying you could say more examples, but you chose to say one.

しろ　　かもしだ	みょう
城とか、鴨志田とか、妙な猫
Like the castle, and like Kamoshida, and like the strange cat.

私はファイナルファンタジーとか、ニーアオートマタとか(の)ゲームが好きです
I like games like Final Fantasy and like Nier Automata


ところ: Just about to; on the verge of doing something: It’s used with verbs in the casual NON-PAST form

出かけるところです
I am just about to go out

信じるところだった		しんじる
I was just about to believe it

こぞう
小僧　何でお前ごときが…と言いたいところだが…
Kid, I was about to want to ask you why you are so (strong) but…
He was about to want to say ‘why does he have that kind of power’

続ける(つづける): to continue to; keen on: Put the verb into the stem form and add 続ける

走る		走り続ける		はしる
To run		To continue to run

これからも日本語を勉強し続けるつもりです
I intend to continue to study japanese from here on
って:named; called: the casual quoting mark. It functions exactly the same as the と quoting particle, it’s just the CASUAL form.

毎日「おはよう」って言ってるニャよ
I’ve been saying ‘good morning’ everyday, meow!

じんじゃへはいるときはかならず	あらう
神社へ入るときは必ず手を洗いなさいって、おばあちゃんが言ってた
Grandma said, whenever you enter a shrine always make sure to wash your hands

受身形(うけみけい):the passive form; passive voice: it shares similarities with the potential form, but they’re not the same, and often follow different conjugation rules and meaning.. The action is the focus, not the actor of the action(can be used to sound distant, polite, or even cold and unconnected to the action).

る verbs: change る into られる. YOU CANNOT DROP THE ら LIKE YOU CAN IN THE POTENTIAL FORM
う verbs: negative form, replace ない with れる

買う		買われる
To buy		To be bought

ほんじつ		しゅくはく　　きゃくさま
本日はキャンプサイトに宿泊のお客様が来られています
Today a visitor has come to the campsite to stay the night!

ちちうえ
父上！何を言われるのです!
Father! What is being said(what are you saying!)

は〜が… は:A but B; however; comparison: This is commonly used to express a comparison between 2 things, of

ひらがなは書けますが、漢字は書けません
I can write hiragana, but I cannot write kanji.

きもち			かなしん	よゆう
お気持ちはわかりますが、悲しんでいる余裕はありません
I understand your feelings but, there isn’t any leeway/room/time for mourning.



やすい:easy to; likely to; prone to; have a tendency to: the verb is easy to do. It can also be used to express someone is likely to do something, or they have a tendency to do something.

Put the verb in the stem form and add やすい

聞きます		聞きやすい
To hear/listen		Easy to hear/listen

				すみ
やっぱりね。ここミズゴロウなら住みやすいだろうなって思ったし
I knew it. I thought It would be an easy place to live for Mizugorou

やっと:at last; finally; barely; narrowly: it’s used before the thing, or even by itself.

へっへっへっへ、やっと追いついたぜ
We’ve finally caught up to you


より:than; rather than; more than: 2 different uses.
1.B is more something than A
2. It can put before adjectives by themselves to simply mean more of that adjective

りろん　　じっせん
あの子は理論より実践が好きなようだ
That child appears to like practical more than theory

英語より日本語が難しい
Japanese is more difficult than english(more than english, japan is difficult)

よりいい作品を作りたい		さくひんをつくりたい
I want to make a more better product


予定だ（よていだ）:plan to; intend to: it’s used to show you plan or intend to do something.
Verbs(dictionary form) + 予定だ
Nouns(dictionary form) + の + 予定だ

おおさか
大阪に行く予定だ	I plan to go to osaka

旅行は二週間ぐらいの予定だ
As for my trip, I plan to go for around 2 weeks.
ようだ:appears; seems; looks as if: this differs from others because it’s based on your own reasoning or judgment of some information. It appears a certain way because you thought about it, rather than something you heard or saw. This reasoning and judgment can still be based on information that you see but it needs to be first hand information.

The same as みたいだ.みたいだ Is a little more casual than ようだ, you’re more likely to see ようだ in written speech or formal situation. You’re more likely to use みたいだ in spoken situation

	毛皮
どこもケガはないようだな
It appears like you aren’t injured anywhere(everywhere?) right?

彼女は嬉しくないようだ
She doesn’t appear happy

＃＃＃＃＃＃＃verbs in the casual form
始まったようだ
It appears like it has begun

＃＃＃＃＃＃＃Nouns with the の particle
夢のようだ	it seems like a dream

＃＃＃＃＃＃＃I-adjectives by themselves
楽しいようだ	it seems like fun

＃＃＃＃＃＃＃NA-adjectives with the NA
賑やかなようだ	にぎやか
It seems like it’s busy/lively

みたいだ:more casual. spoken situation
ようだ:written speech or formal situation

ように／ような: like; as; similar to: just like そうだ can be used to modify nouns and verbs with そうな and そうに, so too can ような・ように. The same rules apply to よう where this is used to express someone’s reasoning and judgment as to why something appears to be a certain way.
いつまでも疼くまだここにあるように	うずく
They always ache/throb like they are still here…(ように is attached to うずく)

このようなときこそ、しっかりしなければ
It’s times like this that you need to be strong.

助ける?助けるとは一体どのようなことを指す?たすける　いったい　さう
Save him? What kind of thing exactly does ‘save him’ indicate
ようになる:to reach the point that; to come to be that; to turn into: Used with verbs in the dictionary or ない form.

たくさん勉強したら、日本語を話せるようになります
If you study Japanese a lot, you will come to the point that you can speak Japanese.

いじゅう
兄の移住がきっかけで遊びに来るようになりました
The chance happened because my older brother moved there, so I have come to hang out there



ようにする:to try to; to make sure that: It’s used to express that you try to make something a certain way or that you make. You use it with verbs in the dictionary form or ない form

俺ならそんな話はしないようにするね
If it were me, I would make sure to not talk about that sort of thing

毎日日本語を勉強するようにしている
I am making sure to study japanese every day


ようと思う:thinking of doing; planning to: It’s the よう from the volitional form. If you’re thinking of doing something, or planning on doing something, use this. Put a verb in the volitional form followed by と思う

日本語を勉強しようと思っている
I’m thinking of studying japanese

ぜひ:by all means; certainly; definitely: it’s an adverb. It is used generally to recommend or urge someone else on, to take a certain action. It’s often seen as an invitation.


ぜひ食べてみてください
Please by all means try to eat some!


全然~ない:not – at all:
ぜんぜん:totally:
づらい:difficult to do(kind of like にくい): the difference between the 2 is in the kanji, にくい comes from 難しい, to be difficult or complicated to do, like the actual process is challenging in itself.づらい comes from 辛い, something that is painful or difficult in an emotional/physical way.
Put a verb in the stem form followed by づらい. It means the verb emotionally or physically puts a burden on you, so it’s difficult to do.
