あら、フェイ。アルルに、何か用なの?
			なにかようなの
Oh, Faye. What do you want with aruru?

ちゃ・じゃ　いけない:MUST NOT DO::::::　It’s the colloquial of saying てはいけない・ではいけない. It’s often used when expressing rules or common knowledge.

ちゃ・じゃ	いけない	must not do	.(it’s a little formal)
It’s the colloquial version of	ては/では	いけない

入れる		いれる		put in/ let in

入れちゃいけない	must not put in/let in
死んじゃいけない	must not die


Using ダメ instead of いけない makes the expression more casual
死んじゃダメ

男の人は中へ入れちゃいけないきまりになってんるんだけど
It’s become a rule that men must not come inside


だけ: only, just, as much as–:::::::: 

	うばいとる
もう一度奪い取るだけさ
I only/just need to steal it back once more

できるだけ	do as much as you can



でしょう	でしょ		I think, It seems, probably, right?(polite):::::Used instead of です, so it’s polite. It’s used to impliy a degree of probability or speculation. You can think/say something is probably okay

いいでしょう I think it’s okay/ it’s okay right?
You’re stating that it’s probably okay, or speculating on whether it is.

うちの兵どもでは、物足りないでしょう
うちのへいどもでは、ものたりないでしょう
I’m sure my troops would not be enough


だろう		CASUAL FORM OF でしょう in the exact same way

で:1.at, in: location where an action occurs. The word before the particule must be a location noun.
2.with, by: express the means or method of doing something
車で行く	go by car

でも: but, however, although: it’s often used to start a new sentence or connect two contradicting ideas

方(ほう)がいい:had better, it’d be better to, should: expressing that it would be better if you did a certain action. It’s used with a verb in any tense

勉強　する・した　方がいい	you should study/ it would be better if you studied

少々気を付けた方がいいかもしれん
I may be better if you were a little careful.


から:from, because(when put after a verb or i-adjective) but if it’s a noun or na-adjective you must use だから

こちら　東京からいらしてる霧生さんです
This is kiryuu-san from tokyo

(31:10)方(かた): the way of doing something;how to do: used with the STEM FORM of a verb, it shows the way of doing something or how to do that particular verb

食べ方: how to eat, how someone eats

丁寧な話し方もできるんだな
ていねいなはなしかた
You can also talk in a polite way of speaking

もっとマシな戦い方はできないの?
Can’t you do a little better way of fighting?

だけ(casual)/けれど(formal)/けれども(formal+polite): but, however, although




くらい/ぐらい:1.about、 approximately.. 

まかせてどれくらい
Leave it to me, Around how much?

2.at least, at the very least

一度くらいは経験したいじゃない?
Wouldn’t you like to experience that at least once?

まだ:still, not yet::::: 

まだだ！まだ魔法障壁がある
まだだ！まだまほうしょうへきがある
Not yet! There’s still a magic barrier

まだ・V・ていません: have not yet: used(with a verb in the teimasen or teinai form) to express an action has not yet been done. Used solely with verbs. I

バスはまだ来ていません	The bus still hasn’t come yet

まだ終わっていない		I’m still not finished

まで:until, as far as, to(and extent), even–: 

ここまでの男か
A man to this extent huh

学校まで
Until school 

家まで
As far as home

そこまで
To there

涙まで		なみだまで
To the point of tears





ましょうか:shall I–; used to offer help to the listener:::::

ぶき　ぼうぐ
武器や防具について聞かせてあげましょうか
Shall I tell you about weapons and armor?
Shall I let/make you listen about weapons or(among other things) armor?

な:ordering someone to not do something: just add な to the dictionary form of a verb 

なあ:sentence ending particle, it shows confirmation, admiration, etc. it’s usually written with a small あ。similar to ね

懐かしいなあ		なつかしいなあ
How nostalgic

ないで: without doing. To do A without doing B. by putting a verb A into the ない form and adding で followed by another verb B you can express doing A without doing B.

さいご		きをぬく
これで最後だよ気を抜かないでせーの
This is the last time. Let’s go without losing focus. Ready, set, Go!

コーヒーにはいつも砂糖を入れないで飲みます
コーヒーにはいつもさとうをいれないでのみます
I always drink coffee without putting in sugar.

ないで: please don’t:add ください to make it more polite	ないで下さい

その名前は口にしないで
don’t speak that name

(53:54)ないといけない・ないとだめ・ないと:must do; have an obligation to do:

ないとダメ	/	ないと is short and casual

脱出しないといけない
だっしゅつしないといけない		We must escape


なくてはいけない・なくちゃいけない: Must do; need to do(subjective):::::: it’s quite formal
なくちゃいけない・なくてはいけない・なくちゃ: must do; need to do::this is a formal expression, it’s more subjective. It’s a casual expression that shows the SUBJECTIVE view of needing to do something. You feel that it’s something you must do and it’s based on your own decision

仕事を見つけなくちゃいけない
I need to find a job

なくてはならない:must do; neet to do. Another way to express these words.(a sense of duty/obligation).. This time we replace いけない with ならない. The core meaning of ikenai is a subjective view that something is not good. However, With ならない, its core meaning is that it is objectively bad, and there’s this sense of obligation to either the rule or society that an action must be done. The core meaning of いけない is a subjective view that something is not good. however with ならない, its core meaning is that it’s objectively bad, and there’s a sense of obligation to either the rule or society that an action must be done.

	ながと
ワシは長門を…ペインを止めなくてはならない
I… I must stop nagato… I must stop pain


なくちゃ(なくては):must do、 need to、 gotta do.. This is the most casual version
早く追いかけなくちゃ
We gotta catch up to him quickly

なくてもいい・なくていい: you don’t have to. It’s used to express that you don’t need to do a certain action. Put the verb in the nai form and add くてもいい　or くていい. Dropping the も makes it more casual.

ミラーがやらなくてもいい仕事だった
It was a job miller didn’t have to do

一人で行かなくてもいい
You don’t have to go alone






になる: to become.. A useful expression showing almost anything becoming something. Works with nouns and na-adjectives

大人になった		おとなになった
I became an adult

お金持ちになりたい
I want to become rich

フェザーが仲間になった	フェザーがなかまになった
Feathers became a group member

To become with i-adjectives: put the adjective into the ku form and add なる

食べるのに夢中になって逃げにくくなるのさ	mixed example
てべるのにむちゅになってにげにくくなるのさ
They will become really absorbed in order to eat and will become difficult to run away

強くなる		つよくなる
To become strong

(1:02:14)のです:to explain something, express reason:: it’s used when you’re talking about a reason or a fact, or explanation as to why something is a certain way. Adding this to a sentence shows that what you’re talking about now feels like the focus is that you’re really talking about the reasons, the facts or the explanations on that matter.

そんなに上士様は偉いのですか	そんなにじょうしさまはえらいのですか
Is it that jyoushi are so great and important?

難しいです		難しいのです
It’s difficult		it is that it’s difficult

んです(casual)		んだ(super casual)

に:destination particle; in, at, on, to. It has a diverse usage.
1.In: within a confined space, doing a certain action.

東京に住んでいます	I am living in kyoto

2.At: at a certain point in time

三時に寝ます		I sleep at three o'clock


もんをひらいたせつなにとびこむぞ
門を開いた刹那に飛び込むぞ
We’ll burst in at the moment you open the gate

3.On: to express where objects are

コーヒーがテーブルの上にあります
The coffee is on(top of) the table

4.To: used to express the direction in which we take an action

日本に行く	go to japan

今　店に入ってきたことや
I just came into the shop


に行く: to go do(verb). Turn the first verb into the verb stem or the part that ends in i. In the nouns that turn into verbs with suru, just use the noun alone, although it only works with some nouns, unless you add し, IN THAT CASE DON’T WORRY

買いに行く go do shopping

それではまた二人で見回りに行ってきます		みまわる
Well, we will again both go to do our patrols


にする:to decide to/on. You can use this when you’re at a cafe, a restaurant: when you’re asked what you’ll have to drink. You can also use it to show what you decide to do

そのときは、ここに戻って来ることにしよう	I think this is the kanji
その時は、ここにもどってくることにしよう
On that occasion, let’s decide to come back here

飲み物は何にする?
What will you decide to have to drink?

コーヒーにする	I’ll decide to have coffee

の:1.possessive particle

2.verb nominalizer: turning verbs into nouns. It can also be used to express the thing or one that is the target of the verb

散歩するのが好きだ
I like walking

食べたのはピザだ
The one that I ate is pizza

俺が心底惚れてたのは別に女だ
おれがしんそこほれてたのはべつのおんなだ
The one that I was in love with from the bottom of my heart was another woman

のが下手:to be bad at something:: we use this to describe more information about doing a certain action.
まだ電気を溜めるのが下手
まだでんきをためるのがへた
I’m still not good at storing electricity:

ので:because of; given that; since: this grammar is used to explain a reason or reasoning for an action, the reason is given before ので. More formal than から, and also very focused in explaining the reasoning. This is more formal than から, and it’s focused on explaining the reasoning

ただいま	きんきゅうしょくいんかいぎをおこないます
只今より、緊急職員会議を行いますので
From now on, there will be an emergency staff meeting, therefore

				ちゅし
雨が降っていたので、試合が中止になりました
Since it rained, the match was cancelled(made suspended)

お:polite marker; honorific prefix particle(onyomi)::it adds a level of politeness and honorifics to a word you like using, this can make words more respectful, refined, or even just a part of a word is that way.
-used with kanji or words that use kunyomi(japanese) reading

ご:polite marker; honorific prefix particle(kunyomi)::You are speaking of someone else’s action or thing in a very respectful and honorific manner.

—these two rules are general, they do not always apply



(1:29:00)を:object marker particle: think of the object in the sentence as something that is the target of the verb in that sentence. 

	なげる
ボールを投げる	throw a ball
バナナをよこせ	hand over the bananas

をください	を下さい: please give me

しかし:but, however. Formal. でも(casual)
それから:and, and then, after that, since then.(LITERALLY FROM THAT):: one of 2 ways in n5 japanese to introduce new info into a sentence. These actions take place independently of each other. it’s more focused on continuation of events after the previous. それからでも=even after that.

ピザを食べました。それから映画を見ました
I ate pizza. And then, I watched a movie

そして:and, and then, thus, and now:: それから　is more focused on continuation of events after the previous. With そして it’s more like ‘and’: I did A, then B, It’s more continuous than それから in terms of story telling, and it keeps the actions feeling like they’re continuing and connected together.

すぎる(すぎん):too much::it’s used to express when something is too much.. It can be used with verbs and adjectives.

Verbs: put the verb in the masu form, remove masu, add すぎる

食べすぎる	to eat too much
食べすぎた	I ate too much

Adjective: i-adjective, remove i, add すぎる..
na-adjective, just add 	すぎる

熱すぎる	too hot
簡単すぎる	too simple

たことがある:to have done something before(the thing of doing it exists)..this is an expression to show we have done a curtain verb some time in the past before now. The が particle can be dropped so it’s casual
Put the verb in plain past, and add　ことがある

前に聞いたことがあるぜ
I’ve heard about it before

日本に行ったことがある	to have been to japan.

たことがない: to have never done something before	たことない

こんなの…映画でしかみたことない
This kind of thing… I’ve only ever seen it in the movies(lit:never seen it in anything but movies)

たり・・たり:do such things as A and B::it’s a useful way of giving a list of various things, it’s best thought of as meaning ‘things like’. it can be used with verbs, nouns and adjectives: just put them in the past form and add り

Verbs: put them in the past form and add り
買い物した	I shopped
買い物したり	I did things like shopping

Nouns and na-adjectives: add だったり	でしたり
ピザだったり		things like pizza
暇だったり		things like being free

I-adjectives: remove i and add かったり
忙しかったり things like being busy

たり:do such things as A

てある(te form followed by aru):is/has been done (resulting state). It makes it feel like something is done intentionally and you can see the resulting state of that action. It's similar to using the past tense form, but it’s different in that it places emphasis on the action being done intentionally, and that end result is still being visible.

あのリスト…何が書いてあるんだ
That list… what is it that has been written

ドアを開けた		i opened the door
ドアが開けてある	The door has been opened

(1:45:20)ている:ongoing action or current state:::::. The progressive tense of a verb



てから:after doing –; since –::since から means from, you can think of it as meaning from doing a verb, or since doing a verb. The two most common meanings are after or since

勉強してから、寝ました
After studying, I went to bed

大きくなってから、初めて会ったからね
It’s because it’s the first time we’ve met since you grew up

てください:please do —::asking someone to do something

てはいけない・てはいけません:must not; may not; cannot;

ぶき　そうび		たよる
武器や装備に頼ってはいけない
You must not rely on weapons and equipment

てもいい・ていい(casual): is okay, is alright to, can may:: if you want to give or ask for permission to do something. It can be used with verbs, nouns and adjectives. Put them in the てform, and then add もいい, although you can drop も if you want to be more casual

呼び捨てにしてくれていいぜ
よびすてにしてくれていいぜ
It’s okay to drop the formalities

食べてもいい
Add でもいい in nouns and na adjectives
静かでもいい		it’s okay even if it’s quiet
ピザでもいい		pizza is okay

高くてもいい		it’s okay even if it’s expensive

と:3 distinctive uses at the n5 level
1.and::it’s quite definitive
2.with::
友達と一緒に行く
Go together with friends

3.as::It can used as a kind of quote for something

私がなぜリボルバーと呼ばれているか	よばれて
Why it is that I’m referred to as revolver


とき:when; at the time::when or at a certain time::::::

Verb:put the verb in casual(dictionary) form and add とき
学校に行くとき	when I go to school

age/noun: add のとき
十八歳のとき　when 18 years old

Adjective:full form, 忙しい	静かな		and add とき
若い時		when young
暇な時		when free

とても: very; awfully; exceedingly; very much

つもり:plan to –; intend to –::it’s used to show intention towards doing a certain action. You put it after a verb to show the intention or plan to do that verb.

本当にやるつもりなのか?
Do you really intend to do it?

いつまでそうしているつもりだ…
How long do you plan to keep doing that…

もう一回この動画を見るつもりです
I intend to watch this video one more time

は:topic marker::speaking of–;as for –:: it shifts the topic of the sentence to what comes before は.


は・・より。。です:

はどうですか: how about; how is::we can ask how a certain noun is, or how is it going.

気分はどうだ?
How is your feeling/mood	

この動画はどうですか
How is this video?



や:and; or; connecting particle

ピザやパスタが好きです	I like things like pizza and pasta

より・・方が:A is more than B..verbs, adjective or nouns. The verb can be used in any form. You can compare anything

Nouns: の comes after the noun.. The rest are there in the normal form

教科書よりこの動画の方が面白いといいな
きょうかしょ　ほう　おもしろい　	
I hope this video has been more enjoyable than textbooks


ず:similar to the ‘not doing’, the negative form of a dictionary verb form: just put a verb in the casual negative form, drop the ない, and add ず

